Clarify use of BOM and Dependabot for dependency management (#4832)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/developer/plugin-development/dependency-management.adoc

references:
- url: https://github.com/jenkinsci/plugin-pom/
  title: Plugin parent POM 4.0 and up
////

> Should we be linking to the generic BOM or encouraging people to use the BOM

Reviewer: this one is correct

Author: Thanks -- I deleted the question.

Author: Thanks!  I removed the question from the source.

Each dependency may have dependencies of its own and different versions of different libraries and plugins may not be compatible with each other.
Moreover, the dependencies can change with each Jenkins release, so managing these dependencies manually can be difficult and time consuming.

Jenkins has tools that simplify dependency management:

* <<jenkins-core-bom,Jenkins core Bill of Materials (BOM)>> centrally defines the **library versions** provided by Jenkins core
* <<jenkins-plugin-bom,Plugin Bill of Materials (BOM)>> centrally defines a set of **plugin versions** that have been tested together
* <<Dependabot>> automatically proposes a pull request when a new version of a dependency is released

== Jenkins core BOM

Jenkins core provides a link:https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Importing_Dependencies[Maven Bill Of Materials (BOM)] that centrally defines versions of various libraries used by Jenkins.
If you are using Maven to build your plugin, then you can simplify dependency management by importing this BOM, at `jenkins.version`.

> Then, dependency versions will automatically be synchronised with whatever version of Jenkins you are building against.

Author: ```suggestion
Dependency versions are then automatically  synchronized with the version of Jenkins against which you are building.
```

> Then, dependency versions will automatically be synchronised with whatever version of Jenkins you are building against.

Author: Would this section flow better if the information about using the core BOM were after the sample error messages? This info could be unified with what is currently in line 53 ("In many cases, upper bounds dependencies errors are best resolved...")

Reviewer 2: I think that's a good idea.  Can you make that change?

> Dependency issues may cause `Require upper bound dependencies` build errors such as:

Author: ```suggestion
Library dependency issues may cause `Require upper bound dependencies` build errors such as:
```

See
link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/developer/plugin-development/updating-parent/#understanding-requireupperbounddeps-failures-and-fixes[Understanding requireUpperBoundDeps failures and fixes] for more information.

This page details ways to simplify the management of dependency versions.

== Apache Maven Bill of Materials (BOM)

The link:https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html#Importing_Dependencies[Apache Maven Bill Of Materials (BOM)]
defines the versions of various libraries used by Jenkins.
It is included in version 2.195 (and LTS version 2.164.x) and later of Jenkins Core.

If you use Maven to build your plugin,
dependencies are defined in the `dependencyManagement` section of you _pom.xml_ file.
You can import the appropriate Jenkins BOM to your _pom.xml_ file
so that dependency versions are automatically synchronised
with the version of Jenkins against which you are building.

To use the Jenkins Core BOM in your plugin:

////
Does this need a hint about how to be sure one is using this?
////
. Be sure that you are using
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/plugin-pom/[Parent POM for Jenkins Plugins] 
(4.0 or later).

> . Go to the the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/bom[jenkinsci/bom] repository.

Reviewer: This section isn't right, there's two bom's.

1. Core bom
2. Plugin bom

Core bom exposes the libraries used by core
Plugin bom is plugins that have been tested to work together

The docs were right before when it said:
> To use the Jenkins Core BOM in your plugin, just use plugin-pom (4.0 or later).

Author: So just refer to plugin-pom with no link?  Is this always installed?

Reviewer 2: I've added some additional text and a video tutorial for
* Update parent pom to use core BOM
* Add plugin BOM to simplify dependency management
* Add Dependabot to automate dependency management

. Go to the `bom-*` folder that corresponds to
the Jenkins version against which you are building.
. Open the _pom.xml_ file in that folder.
. Copy the `dependencyManagement` section from the _pom.xml_ file.
. Paste the `dependencyManagement` section into the _pom.xml_ file for your plugin.
If your file already has a `dependencyManagemnt` section,
replace it with this text.
Your _pom.xml_ file should only have one `dependencyManagement` section.
. Rebuild your plugin to see if this solves your dependency issues.

The _README_ file in the jenkinsci/bom repository includes background
and more details about using the BOM in your plugin.

== Dependabot

////
PLEASE CHECK THIS CAREFULLY!
////
The GitHub link:https://github.com/dependabot[Dependabot] feature
can be used to simplify dependency management for builds
no matter what build tools are used.

> See the link:https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/jenkinsci-dev/XMllKuWLO_8/H7nN70D1AwAJ[discussion here].
> 
> link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/archetypes/blob/master/.github/dependabot.yml[dependabot.yml]
> is the default in the template/archtype.
> 
> Some information about how to implement this and some know obstacles
> are in link:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hRrH8PSCswBQgY_Q-7eHCHCVZHJOl4XgQQCswdUmpKY/edit#heading=h.oqikyovwtohu[Dependabot Evaluation Notes].

Reviewer: these discussions are very dated almost 3 years old now.

Dependabot is a well established github feature, we should probably just link to the official docs: https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/supply-chain-security/keeping-your-dependencies-updated-automatically/enabling-and-disabling-dependabot-version-updates

and to our default template:

```suggestion
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/archetypes/blob/master/.github/dependabot.yml[dependabot.yml]
is the default in the template/archtype.
```

    +-org.slf4j:jcl-over-slf4j:1.7.26
----

This error says that a conflict exists between the versions of `commons-codec` and `jcl-over-slf4j` specified by the plugin versus Jenkins core.

> See link:/doc/developer/plugin-development/updating-parent/#understanding-requireupperbounddeps-failures-and-fixes[Understanding requireUpperBoundDeps failures and fixes] for more information.

Reviewer 3: I get a "Page Not Found" when I click on this link.

Reviewer 3: @MarkEWaite This is how the redirected link looks like: https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/ad0f99a50238d6c4675265d8046706e15b899987/doc/developer/plugin-development/updating-parent/#understanding-requireupperbounddeps-failures-and-fixes

I just clicked on the 'Files Changed' section of this PR, then clicked on 'View File', and then clicked on this hyperlink.

Reviewer 3: Oh, should I view these links in the deployed Jenkins site instead?

In many cases, upper bounds dependencies errors are best resolved by updating the Jenkins core Bill of Materials and by using the Jenkins plugin Bill of Materials.

=== Update the Jenkins Core Bill of Materials (BOM)

> Update the parent pom version with the command:

Author: ```suggestion
Update the parent pom version with the following commands:
```

[source,bash]
----
$ mvn versions:update-parent
$ mvn clean verify
----

See the video below for a step by step guide to updating the parent pom.

.Update the parent pom

> video::Fev8KfFsPZE[youtube, width=852, height=480,start=807]

Reviewer 3: I'm not able to view this attached video, are you able to view it?

Reviewer 4: Yes https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fev8KfFsPZE

== Jenkins plugin BOM

The plugin bill of materials (BOM) defines the versions of various plugins used by specific Jenkins versions.

> The plugin bill of materials includes many commonly used plugins.
> It simplifies dependency management for plugins that depend on other plugins.

Author: ```suggestion
The plugin bill of materials includes many commonly used plugins
and simplifies dependency management for plugins that depend on other plugins.
```

> A plugin that tests its Pipeline implementation will typically depend on several Pipeline plugins.

Author: ```suggestion
A plugin that tests its Pipeline implementation typically depends on several Pipeline plugins.
```

> The plugin BOM provides Pipeline plugin version numbers so that the developer does not need to maintain the independent version numbers of the Pipeline plugins,

Author: ```suggestion
The plugin BOM provides Pipeline plugin version numbers so that the developer does not need to maintain the independent version numbers of the Pipeline plugins.
```

The plugin bill of materials is defined in the `dependencyManagement` section of your _pom.xml_ file.
To use the Jenkins plugin BOM in your plugin:

> . Confirm that you are using the link:/doc/developer/plugin-development/updating-parent/[current parent pom] with the command `mvn versions:update-parent`

Reviewer 3: Not able to visit this link

> . Locate the most recent plugin bom version nuumber on the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/bom/releases[plugin bom releases page]

Author: ```suggestion
. Locate the most recent plugin bom version number on the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/bom/releases[plugin bom releases page]
```

> . Insert the `dependencyManagement` section into the _pom.xml_ file

Author: ```suggestion
. Copy the `dependencyManagement` section from the _pom.xml_ file in that directory
. Insert this `dependencyManagement` section into the _pom.xml_ file for your plugin
```

+
[source,xml]
----
<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.jenkins.tools.bom</groupId>
            <artifactId>bom-2.303.x</artifactId>
            <!-- Latest version goes here -->
            <version>1117.v62a_f6a_01de98</version>
            <scope>import</scope>
            <type>pom</type>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
----

> . Remove the `<version>` values from plugin dependencies in _pom.xml_

Author: ```suggestion
. Remove the `<version>` values from plugin dependencies in your plugin's _pom.xml_
```

. Rebuild your plugin to see if this solves your dependency issues.
  Many commonly used plugins are included in the plugin pom.
  However, not **all** plugins are included.
  You may need to iterate on removing `<version>` values from specific plugins

See the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/bom#readme[plugin BOM documentation] for further details.

> The video below demonstrates adding the plugin BOM to a Jenkins plugin.

Author: ```suggestion
The video below demonstrates how to add the plugin BOM to a Jenkins plugin.
```

.Simplify plugin dependency management with the plugin BOM

> video::pk1gweLvcEI[youtube, width=852, height=480, start=1771]

Reviewer 3: Not able to see this video as well. Am I missing something from my end?

Reviewer 2: > Not able to see this video as well. Am I missing something from my end?

Not sure.  

Can you describe the environment where you're not seeing the video?  

What operating system?  

What browser?  

What's the URL of the page when you're viewing it?  

Does the video thumbnail image appear on the page?
